All right, enough of this abstract
talk about period one, period two,
period three.
I wanna get real.
I wanna talk about a real data set, with
real customers, real behavior, and real
decisions on the part of the organization
that actually provided the data to us.
I'm gonna actually start
with a non-profit context.
And you might find that appealing,
you might not.
In some sense it really doesn't matter.
Let me just give you a few details about
it, and then when we look at the data set
as whole you'll see that it's applicable
to a broad variety of different settings.
Profit, non profit, domestic,
international, B to B, B to C.
I think everyone will find something
appealing about this basic kind of data.
I want to talk about a specific
non profit organization
that's looking at its donors over time.
So with so many companies, they're gonna
take their customers, their donors and
we're gonna find a whole bunch of them
who were acquired at the same time.
I think this is actually a very
important lesson beyond the analytics,
beyond the predictive models.
Very important for companies to be able to
look at their customers on a cohort basis.
Let's identify all customers who we
either acquired at the same time,
we acquired them through the same campaign
or maybe through the same channel or
maybe they all made the same
first purchase with us.
Well, in this case it's gonna
be a time-based cohort.
We're gonna look at a bunch of
donors who made their first
donation to this non profit
organization in 1995.
So, in other words,
with knew nothing about these people.
They didn't exist to us at all until 1995,
they made a donation.
Like, hey, we have a new donor here.
And so we're gonna follow these folks for
the six years after 1995 and
then we're gonna wanna make predictions
about them for the five years after that.
So we're talking about
a very long data set.
Again, the kind of data that companies
might not have had available to them at
all in the old days.
But today, because of digital everything,
it's becoming increasingly easy to create
these long histories for customers,
and more important than ever,
to be able to make statements about
who's gonna do what, when in the future.
So you can picture the data
structure right over here.
We can see we have 11,104 customers,
11,104 rows in a spreadsheet and
then we have these bunch of columns
where each columns represents a year and
we're simply asking, did they or
didn't they make a donation?
For right now.
We don't care how many
donations they might have made,
although rarely do people make
more than one a year, and
we don't even care about the M part of RFM
or what the size of those donations were.
All we care about is did they donate or
not.
I'm gonna give a 1 if they did make
a donation and a 0 if they didn't.
So if you look at the data structure here,
first you see this whole column of ones.
Because that's telling us that all of
these customers were acquired in 1995.
And now you see a bunch of zeroes and
ones to the right of that,
basically saying did they or
didn't they make a donation.
Over each of the next six
years after being acquired.
So, let's first stare at that data and
really get to know it better,
and then we're gonna wanna make some
statements about who's likely to do what
in the future.
Before we even do that, though,
just look at this data set.
There's a bunch of customers doing
things or not doing things over time.
So in this particular case,
it's donations.
But you can imagine this very same
data structure for, oh I don't know,
a hotel chain.
So we have a bunch of people
in our loyalty program,
did they stay in one of our properties or
not in a given month?
It might be for a credit card firm.
Did these people have revolving interest
charges or not on a month-to-month basis?
It could be for
a mobile gaming application.
Did people play the game or
not on a day-to-day basis?
So I hope you can see that this
data structure is very general.
It's very practical.
I don't really care what the ones and
zeros represent.
Whether they're purchases, whether they're
posting social media, staying in hotels,
interest charges, whatever it might be and
I don't even care what the time period is.
So here we're focusing on a year as the
period, but it absolutely can be a month,
a week, a day, even a second
depending on what the situation is.
So before I go on I just want
you to appreciate just the,
the generality of this
kind of data structure.
It's data that many of you have
contributed to as consumers,
as companies try to track and
anticipate what you might be doing.
And also on the business side, you might
be working with data structures like this.
To help you become just a little
bit more comfortable with it,
let me just pick out a few examples here.
And I'd like you to actually make
a prediction for me based on
what limited information you have, what
you see in front of you on this slide.
I'd like you make some predictions for
certain kinds of customers.
So for instance,
let's start with Bob over here.
So look at Bob, you can see that
after Bob was acquired in 1995, and
again, we're not gonna predict the 1995
purchase cuz we know nothing about Bob or
anyone else in this data set until
after that purchase occurred.
Look at Bob, out of six opportunities,
he donated all six times.
He went six out of six.
So let's make statements about Bob for
the next five years.
So in fact I'd like you to
really write that down.
What's your best guess about how
many donations Bob will make
out of the next five opportunities.
And if your answer is I don't know,
I don't have any idea,
then you're absolutely right.
Because, to be honest with you,
I don't necessarily care about Bob.
I don't necessarily care
about this one customer.
What I really care about in my ability
to make good predictions about,
wouldn't be Bob per se,
it would be the Bobs.
Tell me about all the customers who
share these same characteristics.
And so while it might be hard for me to
make statements about any one of them,
once I start grouping them together, and
in this data set, as you'll see, there
are about 1,200 Bobs, I wanna be able to
make statements about the Bobs on average.
So if we think about the Bobs, who have
gone six out of six since being acquired,
how many donations on average will they
make out of the next five opportunities.
So any one of them will make zero, one,
two, three, four, or five donations.
When we look across all of them,
some will make zero, some will make five,
some will make two or three,
what's the average across all of them?
I want you to write that number down.
So that's Bob, and
now let's look at Sarah over here.
Since being acquired in 1995,
what has Sarah done?
Nothing!
She's the opposite of Bob.
She's gone O for six,
she's done absolutely nothing.
So I want you to make a prediction
about Sarah, or again, the Sarahs,
all of these customers who have
done nothing since being acquired.
Now, you might be wondering.
Why should we make statements about Sarah?
She's done nothing for six years.
Let's just get rid of those customers.
They can't be worth much to us.
And the fact of the matter is, any one
of the Sarahs probably isn't worth much.
But why is it that we're so
interested in tracking Sarah?
Because there's so many of them.
Even if you look at this
slide right over here,
look at how many Sarahs you see
with the zero since being acquired.
Turns out that the Sarah, that is to say
customers who do nothing after being
acquired over some observable period
of time, are very, very common.
In this data set,
they represent about 33% of the customers.
I see in many data sets
they are often over 50%.
So while any one of those Sarahs might not
be worth much, collectively to the extent
that there's any value in them at all,
when we add all that up, the Sarahs can
actually still be a fairly large chunk
of value for the company in the future.
Especially when we look over the long run.
So I want you to write down your
prediction for Sarah, or for the Sarahs.
How many donations on average will they
make over the next five opportunities?
And I have one more quiz question for
you right now.
I want you to compare Mary and Sharmila.
Okay, I'm not even going
to say anything about them.
You can see the numbers for
yourself right over here.
So I want you look at Mary and
Sharmila and in fact I want
you to answer two questions.
Question one.
Which of them will be worth more,
on average, over the next five years?
And question two.
By how much?
So take a minute, look at the Marys,
look at the Sharmilas,
and think what it is that makes one
of them more valuable than the other.
And I want you to write that down, and
make that prediction about which one's
gonna be more valuable, and by how much.
We'll take a break and we'll come on back
and talk about some of the logic that you
might have been using to make that
decision between Mary and Sharmila.